okay hello everyone and welcome to
today's online event which is jointly
hosted by the department of anthropology
and the international inequalities
institute i'm francisco fejere and i'll
be the chair this evening
in today's event which is entitled the
dawn of everything
david wenger will be in conversation
with alpha shah about his new book
co-authored with the late david graber
which is called the dawn of everything
new history of humanity
before introducing our speakers let me
say a few words about
the author who's not with us today about
david graber graber was an
anthropologist and a very influential
public thinker who tackled a number of
big and important topics
from his best-selling book that the
first 5000 years
to his analysis of jobs he
really helped shape the conversation
lsu was fortunate to have him as a
professor here from 2013
um until
his his premature death on the 2nd of
september 2020 just over a year ago and
a community of scholars here is surely
poorer without him this event today
actually marks the first
in a series of events commemorating
david graber's legacy
it's also the first public event on
david's last book which he completed
with david wengrow
just before he died
the book the dawn of everything a new
history of humanity will be out
a week from uh from yesterday as i
understand it on the 19th
of october and it can be already
pre-ordered now and i think there'll be
a link
uh on the chat for you to do that
now from next week till the end of the
term the anthropology department will be
hosting a series of seminars every
friday morning with two world-leading
anthropologists discussing one of
david's key texts in each seminar these
are curated and chaired by alpa herself
who's
our one of our panelists today
and she says everyone's welcome to them
i think there's a link also in the chat
for those
i'd like to ask you now if we could to
please have a minute silence out of
respect for david before i introduce our
speakers
[Music]
thank you very much for that
now i'm delighted to uh that we have
today david wengrow who's a british
archaeologist and a professor of
comparative archaeology
at the institute of archaeology at
university college london and my
colleague alpa alpacha who is a
professor at the department of
anthropology here at lse and also a
convener of the global economies of care
research theme at the international
inequalities institute
which which i chair
the two speakers have
[Music]
distinguished careers and multiple
achievements and if i were to describe
their cvs we would take too long so i'll
just leave the introduction at that
i'll turn to them in a moment let me
just say the event will run for an hour
and a half for an hour and 25 minutes
from now until 7 30 p.m
london time
our speakers will
have a conversation for about 45 to 50
minutes and then of course as usual
there'll be a chance for you all to ask
questions for the audience to post
questions in the final 30 minutes of the
event we ask that you please do so using
the q a box at the bottom of your
screens
and please state your affiliation
and name
when when you do that
our next public event just to say uh to
be held here at the iii is going to be
called social policy a critical and
intersectional analysis and it'll take
place uh next thursday the 21st of
october at 6 pm there's more information
at the ii website
finally if you're we do have bsl
interpretation as you can see and if
you're using that
and you'd like to pin the interpreter
you could do that so that you don't uh
don't lose them uh as the screens move
around
uh for now i just want to hand over to
alpa uh and and david and i hope you'll
enjoy the event thanks very much over to
you all
thank you
thanks sir so much chico
um for this introduction and for sharing
our event today
uh it's very hard to um come to terms
with the fact that we are doing this
without david graber
but also
at the same time quite amazing that
we're here at all
so many things that could have
derailed the dawn of everything
the last few years um i had seen various
parts of the manuscripts that developed
but it was on august uh the 12th last
year that i got an email with the entire
script from david grover
he said
so here it is actually i'm in berlin but
only maybe three-fifths better
honestly can't figure this thing out how
about yourself
david was clearly very sick at the time
and had been for a while
complaining about a soapy taste in his
mouth pins and needles feelings in his
hands and and his feet and
but none of us knew that within a few
weeks he would be gone
looking back now i wonder whether he
knew
or if he had some idea of what was to
come he was clearly quite worried
i guess you know we'll never know
but
so
characteristic of david david being
david he made sure he would leave us
with this with a parting gift
a gift which is full of life which
transcends our own mortality
that gives us new life
a gift that he has been just stating
with david wengrow over the last
decade
david wengrow i remember how excited
david was you know when he first met you
it was more than a decade ago
there's a cold february night and he
said alpa alpha come come you've really
got to come you've got to come and meet
david david wengrow
and i said to him david come on i should
be hibernating right now you know i was
seeing myself as living out some of the
seasonality arguments that are made in
the dawn of everything and to which we
will return later today
but it was uh david's birthday so i
traced off to notting hill and you know
meat we did
over time i understood the basis of
david's excitement
in you david he had found the perfect
partner to rethink our past in order to
reimagine the future
a match that was going to wed
archaeology and anthropology that was
going to give us
infinitely new possibilities and
hopefully new communities
to rewrite history
to make history
david of magic and david of monsters you
became for me
i watched you play and grow the script
there were many things many many things
in the way but persevere you did both of
you in very different ways
i know david david wenger you it's not
been easy at all to carry this final
script through to publication
nor be here today without david graber
beside you
so thank you
um thank you
i see i guess
my role today as a being a kind of
medium
a medium who can hopefully
help the two davids
draw out the monstrosity that has been
cast of our past
and the magic that has been hidden in
plain sight
the dawn of everything really is a bomb
full of gems
a bomb that blows up the evolutionary
myths of the past that we have been fed
and all reproduced
that human societies have grow grown you
know from hunter gatherer bands
progressively to tribes chieftains and
states or some other such teleological
narrative
and that we're all the more
sophisticated and civilized for this
kind of
trajectory
it's a bomb that explodes such myths and
gives us new ones
more hopeful more interesting and more
creative ones
and uh yeah there are many little little
jewels all along the way uh those i
think will have to be kept for the
reader to to discover you know the
reader who dives into this is big the
book
700 pages
whose magic we will only be able to
allude to
in our brief conversation today
so um yeah without any further ado we
must begin
uh and begin we must with inequality i
think
this is an event that's hosted by the
anthropology department and the
international inequalities institute
and you know all those years ago
when you began you were in fact going to
write a book about inequality
what happened david that's right that's
right and thank you alpha i mean as i
see it you're
i'm hoping you can hear me by the way
it's always worth checking
um
yeah
as i see it
you're really just continuing the role
that you always have with this book
because you are one of the very very
very few people who was there right from
the beginning over 10 years ago when it
started to
come into into focus and and you've been
there all along so i'm really grateful
and happy that we can talk about it
now um you're absolutely right actually
initially what we planned to do
was write a small book
a small book on the origins of social
inequality
and uh
over a decade later we've ended up
writing
quite a big book which is explicitly
not about the origins of social
inequality actually as you know in one
of the early chapters
we delve down into why
anyone would have thought that was a
particularly good question to ask in the
first place if you're looking at the
broad sweep of human history the origins
of social inequality because it
it already seems to assume so much
it assumes there was the time before
inequality and then something happened
to change that all so the rest of
history becomes a matter of trying to
figure out what was that thing or
things which as we discover along the
way is
maybe not the best way of framing
a broad approach to
to history but i mean actually what
spurred us to write the book initially i
guess was something much simpler which
is that we could see there was a lot of
other literature out there in the world
making assertions about this broad sweep
of human history that were basically
just wrong or at least half a century
out of date
many of them also go on to reflect on
the political implications of this wrong
out-of-date story
which turn out to be a bit worrying
for example the idea that for most of
our history as you mentioned
our species lived in these tiny
egalitarian bands of hunter-gatherers
that's how we originated and then
somehow we fell from this original state
of grace into
inequality
um it's not true
or that the origin of cities inevitably
leads to
the state again it's not true but
there's some very deeply rooted
assumptions there about how human
societies
develop
yeah you have these um you know at the
foundations of the book there are these
two great men you know who is
influential origins you tear down
there's on the one hand russo
who claimed that we were once noble
savages
and the other
um
is hobbs you know who is basically
saying that we would all kill each other
if we could and said if we're left to
our own devices
make sure you know make sure that life
is nasty british and short i mean you
yeah you know you call the people who
reproduce them
hobbs and hawks and russoian doves tell
us tell us more about
well it's true we have a little bit of
fun at the start of the book um slightly
at the expense of the new
new versions of hobson rousseau remember
we're going back centuries here i mean
both of these people hobbes uh
wrote his book leviathan founding text
of modern political theory came out in
1651 i think and then about a century
later
1754 rousseau pens his second discourse
the discourse from the origins of social
inequality these are both um
state of nature theorists what that
means is they allow themselves to
speculate
about the
original form of humanity what were
people like in the earliest
days um
and by the way they're both completely
upfront especially with sir
writes very clearly you know i'm making
this up this is not to be taken as fact
it's not science it's not the basis for
reconstructing anything that really
happened these are essentially parables
you know they're fables although
strangely as you've mentioned um their
fate in the hands of modern social
scientists has been quite the opposite
they have been taken as the basis of
real studies of how human societies are
evolved
but they do give us these two completely
different juxtaposed notions of what
that state of nature might have been
actually resources is much weirder than
most people
realize
we don't even start out in bands
humanity is supposed to start out almost
as a bunch of completely isolated
individuals
like wandering through the forest living
off wild berries and resources very few
of any material possessions but very
happy
in this state of complete sort of
naivety and then
we take up farming
which brings along with it private
property and a division of labor and
with the division of labor this ushers
in government to protect the property
and and we know the rest of the story
and it's really all parable you know
it's meant to illustrate his famous
point
man is born free but look everywhere
he's in chains
that's right and and and harps as you
mentioned sort of does the opposite but
actually whichever of these um
myths let's just call them myths
that's what they are
whichever of these myths you go for you
kind of end up in the same place
so in the modern retellings
uh small means simple and egalitarian if
you like rousseau
big big society means complex but also
hierarchical so the obvious conclusion
of the story then is that because there
are what 8 billion people on the planet
um we are effectively
stuck you know we're fated to live with
these really very radical levels of
inequality um just as a sort of side
effect of living in big sophisticated uh
societies and yes you know we can fiddle
around the edges and adjust tax regimes
and that sort of thing but structurally
there's not really much to be done which
if you think about it at the present
time
is quite a concerning uh conclusion
fortunately though uh modern science
archaeology anthropology uh show us that
uh it's not true
neither of the stories are are in fact
uh even remotely correct in fact they're
both almost uh entirely wrong and i
assume we'll go into that but
maybe we should also talk about why we
got it all so wrong
uh in the first place
absolutely yeah yeah i mean i want to i
want to come come on to um you know the
evidence that you reveal and
um but
but let's go before that to another
person who who you
who you bring up um
another man who's crucial to your story
right and and he's the wonderful kandia
rank this the great chief of the
wedont one one dance
uh you know french who called him a too
and i remember back in 2018 you know
when um we were in the senior dining
room at the lsc talking after the usual
friday
morning anthropology seminar at which we
will pay tribute to david graber's work
this term you know back then
david was like he just couldn't stop
himself talking with such excitement
anybody who was ready to listen about
this indigenous statesman called kanye
rank who was so utterly brilliant and
who according to david was in fact
responsible for much of the
enlightenment discourse on freedom and
equality and you know tell us about
kandyorang why is he so important
and actually david's not the first to
say it i mean they're a indigenous
historians like george suis a canadian
historian himself of wendart heritage
um we've been writing about this stuff
for years but it's i think it's quite
telling
what does and doesn't get
airtime in the academy so in a way in
these parts of the book really um we're
standing on the shoulders
of other scholars whose work perhaps
hasn't been given the attention it
deserves
um so this is us delving down into
exactly that business of what is the
origins of the question the origins of
social inequality and actually if you
look at what enlightenment thinkers
like rousseau actually said themselves
about where they got their ideas about
freedom and equality
they themselves often point to the
americas
and particularly to the eastern
woodlands region of north america
now
there is a problem here and it's
basically a problem of historiography so
most modern historians of ideas say no
they dismiss this it can't possibly be
true that indigenous thinkers and
indigenous societies had such great
impact on european thought
in the 18th century so there's a debate
here to be had basically what we have
are these travelers accounts and
missionary relations and they often
include these lengthy dialogues
with what's usually referred to by the
european author as some sort of wise
savage
and
in fact those dialogues do revolve
precisely around ideas that became
central to enlightenment thought
political freedoms religious freedoms
but it's always assumed these days that
the so-called savage is
a fabrication of the european
author kind of suck puppet
who the european has made up in order to
express opinions that might get them
into trouble about dayism or
sexual moors or marriage or whatever it
may be so they put them in the mouth of
this exotic other figure
and it's important to stress just how
popular these dialogues were in europe
at the time i mean it would translate
into every language you can think of
there were these endless uh theatrical
productions that ran as long as cats and
they miserable dramatizing um
the um the content
um but as i mentioned what's intriguing
is that other modern scholars
including indigenous scholars have gone
back to the same early colonial sources
and reached very different conclusions
so not only uh in some cases was the
so-called savage interlocutor a real
person but we can actually even identify
who it was and kandiranka you mentioned
is really the key figure here he's the
17th century
wendut statesman he was famous in that
region of the great lakes in what's
today canada as a brilliant orator and a
debater he was also a very
seasoned
warrior and he was one of the key
figures one of the signatories in the
great piece of montreal
in 1701
anyway we have various accounts that
corroborate that in the late 17th
century he was very frequently invited
as a kind of honored guest to the table
of the then governor of that part of
what the europeans called new france a
man called frontenac he also founded
himself as a bit of a debater
and it's clear that they had a sort of
proto-enlightenment salon salah
going there where kandironk would be
invited to play the role of the rational
skeptic sort of peering in at all the
peculiarities of french society now
remember this is the
reign of louis xiv the sun king there
are lots of peculiar things for him to
comment on and disparage and critique so
he really lays in in particular he lays
into the french of the europeans for
their constant sort of grovelling and
obsequiousness you know deference and
hierarchy and you care so much about
ranks the obsession with money
but particularly also just the lack of
generosity
the fact that you know european cities
are riddled with hungary and homeless
people
all these things seem to have been quite
alien to to indigenous societies at that
time in that region
um
and it's through the writings of another
frenchman the baron
he was a close associate of kandironk
and of the french governor at that time
he was fluent in algonquin
and when dart
languages and he documents these
conversations uh cut a long story short
he puts books out there
right at the opening of the 18th century
and they become best sellers they spread
like wildfire these curious dialogues
with a savage who has traveled
and every major enlightenment writer
voltaire diderot montesquieu they will
do imitations so they'll switch you know
sometimes it's a half huron or a
tahitian or a persian uh peruvian uh but
the words and the contents of the
sentiments are still
in essence
candia wrong and the most important one
for us
was madame galafini's
letters
of a peruvian woman it's published right
in the middle of the 18th century where
she puts the indigenous critique
of european society into the mouth of an
inca princess called zelia
and she shows a draft to her friend much
like david showed a draft to you of our
book um
but um
the friend in this case is ann robel
teogo
who is really the inventor of our modern
version of social evolution
and he he doesn't react very well
he says yes you know freedom equality
it's all very admirable you know we
couldn't possibly be against these sort
of things but
isn't this just a bit dangerous you know
it's a little bit subversive and um
maybe
tioga suggests maybe
the reason that indigenous americans
have these freedoms
it's not because they're superior
it's because they're inferior
and by that he meant in particular
technologically inferior inferior in
terms of material progress and within a
few years he's written up
what become his hugely influential works
on universal history where he presents
for the first time
social evolution as we still know it
today the whole of humanity
divided up and classified according to
modes of livelihood hunters and
gatherers
farmers and eventually
urban commercial civilization and
crucially
egalitarian societies are shoved down to
the bottom realm of this new
evolutionary
in other words
what we now think of as social evolution
was first proposed as a direct
reaction a direct counter response to
the indigenous critique of european
society
that's where kandironk is so fundamental
to the story of utah yeah
um
yeah fascinating it's let's go to some
of the
reinterpretation of the archaeological
record you know which is um
that you
with
you know you basically have the
anthropological eye the lens of an
anthropologist you know looking at back
at the archaeological record and
reinterpreting this kind of evolutionary
narrative and you're making these like
startling revelations all along the way
i mean there's many there's many
highlights and there's no way we're
going to be able to cover everything
today but
let's um
let's talk about
let's give us yes let's give our
listeners you know let's let's let's
give a flavor of what lies ahead and
the first thing i think is to turn to
this idea of seasonal variations of
social structures
you know you've it's an old insight from
anthropology you know you you you draw
on marcel morse and
henry
bush has some seasonal variations of the
eskimo and you basically apply it to the
paleolithic and
other ages to show how human beings have
been
self-consciously experimenting with
different social possibilities
communities yeah going from hierarchical
to egalitarian societies when there's
some there's others that have been done
the same
edmund leeches political assistance of
highland burma which
you don't cite that
tell us more i mean tell us more why is
this oscillation that anthropologists
have long drawn attention to so
important to how we think about the
outcome okay yes i mean so this this
happened right at the beginning of our
project actually when i was giving that
lecture for the royal anthropological
society institute rather
um and it was one of the first things
that really alerted us that we just need
to break out of this tilgo trap this
trap that tilgo and rousseau sort of
laid for us
um
where
you know it's just kind of assumed that
before the invention of agriculture
people were somehow devoid of political
imagination you know just kind of
adapting to their environments or
something and it's still perfectly
common for people with full academic
credentials to say this sort of thing
will say that well all hunter-gatherers
can be divided into perhaps two or three
basic types but it's really beginning to
look hopelessly reductionist so just to
give you a flavor of some of this
material
that we present in the book we have for
example
in ice age europe these individuals who
are buried like kings and queens just
absolutely suffused with regalia and
material wealth this is 30 000 years ago
at a time when there's really no
evidence for
monarchy or states or anything like that
so what's going on there um in the
americas we've got these massive public
arenas where hunter-gatherers gathered
in their thousands like poverty point
the site known as poverty point in
louisiana about three and a half
thousand years ago so what's that all
about in the middle east we've got uh
quebec tepe where 10 000 years ago there
are non-agricultural hunter-gatherer
societies erecting these massive stone
temples apparently on a seasonal
basis
and we also have ethno-historical
accounts in the americas on the west
coast of societies adopting slavery and
then abolishing it and these are
societies that have never practiced
agriculture at any point in their known
histories so the whole idea that hunting
and gathering is a single mode of
production with a handful of
characteristics is just starting to look
really redundant so how to explain these
things that we're seeing and this is
where the seasonal variations that you
mentioned come in
many societies across the world
many of them hunter-gatherers not all of
them by any means
as you say
have alternated seasonally between
entirely different social political
legal ethical systems often this follows
patterns of aggregation physical
aggregation of people and then dispersal
linked to things like the migration of
game or fish runs or
annual nut harvests whatever it may be
and the key thing here is that they
apply the same logic to their political
system so for example with groups like
the inuit
or the plains indians of north america
you could be living
for part of the year
in a society with strict rules governing
the distribution of property and
ownership a society with chiefs who have
real powers of command and coercion
but then the same society would flip up
to a completely different set of ethical
and political principles so suddenly
goods are shared out in a more communal
manner chiefs lose their coercive power
and have to rely on persuading people
and diplomacy actually claude levistos
was probably the last person to write
seriously about this kind of issue in
relation to the nambicuara of the mato
grosso in the amazon rainforest and then
it kind of dropped out of people's
thinking but if you look at the sort of
modern archaeological evidence we have
today
how people were living in
pre-agricultural times
this is exactly what you find as this
kind of cornucopia or a sort of
encyclopedia of social possibilities uh
it's it's about as far away as you can
possibly imagine from the sort of drab
idea that everyone is living all the
time in egalitarian bands of
hunter-gatherers
um
yeah you also have this um apart from
societies moving seasonally
uh and varying social structures
seasonally you've also got
these examples wonderful examples of
societies who are
based on the same kind of mode of
production if you like you know you you
use that language in order to critique
it um or the same kind of livelihood who
are actually
um have got completely different social
structures living right side by side
right side by side yeah
the north american
examples yeah the fisher forages i know
what you have in mind um which is really
the um the history of indigenous peoples
along the west coast of north america
which traditionally are divided into
what anthropologists call culture areas
we used to call culture areas
the californian culture area and the
culture area of the northwest coast
and much as you say uh it's been known
for a very very long time over a century
that hunter-gatherer societies in both
regions display profoundly different
social and ethical
uh characteristics so the northwest
coast ones are often compared to
medieval feudal barons living in ranked
households
they do keep
actually hereditary it did keep hundreds
of years ago hereditary slaves there was
a lot of raiding and warfare
and they throw these incredibly
elaborate banquets
known in the anthropological literature
potluch
californians their neighbors just to the
south
are really quite the opposite uh being a
leader is about being frugal
uh it's even reflected in
the fact that people have to be
particularly thin and work very hard and
very publicly and show that they're hard
working
there have even been comparisons between
californian foragers and the kind of
protestant work ethic that's found in
europe in the run-up to
capitalism but the question was just
almost never asked we discovered to our
astonishment how these two
almost polar opposite kind of societies
ended up um living next to each other
what is the process by which that
happens and in one of the chapters of
the book we try and put together the
anthropological evidence
oral histories which are actually very
rarely used it seems
and the archaeological evidence to try
and reconstruct some of this process
and what you find is that this is very
self-conscious
um and this brings us back also to the
seasonality arguments what we're seeing
here are not complex hunter-gatherers
you know who are just slight variations
on each other
we're seeing societies which are
very consciously constructing their own
futures uh and reconfiguring households
and family relations in order to make
sure that certain things do or do not
happen in this case slavery which
basically um
falls away as you transition from the
northwest coast cultural zone there's
there's a book by a historian called
leland donald called aboriginal slavery
on the northwest coast where he
documents with great statistical rigor
the rates of slavery and that sort of
thing and it just drops off as you get
into california and we go into some of
the processes by which this
took place um but it's it's kind of
essentially the same point with
seasonality
that you know if you're stepping into
and out of
uh one kind of social
skin if you like at another time of year
you can also reflect back
on that other kind of society or even
imagine what it might be to live all the
time in a society with powerful leaders
and kings and queens and then choose not
to do that or to confine those things to
ritual seasons which is actually
something we find uh on the northwest
coast
as well and this was really a really a
sort of major realization in the early
stages of writing
the dawn of everything is
just how much that potential for
self-conscious
transformation has been written out it's
been taken out of the way we write about
human prehistory and often in the same
breath how europeans write about
non-european peoples in general so just
learning to recognize the ways in which
people we've been taught to think of as
sort of childlike or just adapting to
their environment
were politically creative
actually in ways that we we would find
very difficult to emulate
you have this uh the russoian myth which
we you know we often think about russo
and the noble savage but you talk about
russo and the myth of the stupid savage
you know because
yeah
i mean it means once you make this step
you know it means you can do away with
all those silly old questions about
hobbes and rousseau and are humans
innately this or innately that are we
egalitarian are we really hierarchical
we really altruistic or competitive no i
mean actually what makes us
sapiens uh is exactly our ability to
navigate between these kinds of
possibilities and this changes the
nature of the question doesn't it so
we're no longer asking you know if
humans for most of our history were
moving between different social
arrangements putting up hierarchies
taking them down
doing it again
then the real question can't be
what are the origins of social
inequality the real question is how do
we get stuck
yeah absolutely um i'm going to come
back to that but i think there's a
couple of other
issues which are just so um
so brilliant in the book which would be
great to talk about a little bit um
what is the issue of um
scale you know um you make us completely
rethink scale
um if for ages we've been thinking about
you know hunter galleries living in
these small scale groups and then the
various technological advances making
the world a place in which we are much
more connected on larger and larger
scales
you're actually in the book making the
opposite argument right that in fact as
populations have got larger most people
are living their lives on an ever
smaller scale in social terms that's
right right yes social world in fact um
that's right and actually people who
have read the book so far this seems to
be one of their favorite bits is
basically where we pick apart
all these myths about scale
i mean i guess the basic idea in much of
the existing literature is that here we
are wandering around in this modern very
complex world but still between our ears
is this evolved hunter-gatherer brain
which isn't really wired for it so we
need all these props and scaffolding and
all these institutional hierarchies
we need we need politicians we need
bureaucrats we need judges and enforcers
just to keep it all together just to
stop everything getting overloaded and
just sort of
sinking into chaos
um but of course the key thing there is
what you mean
by
a hunter-gatherer brain and actually if
you look at the latest studies and
journal of human evolution the latest
demographic studies of
modern hunter-gatherers it's actually
really fascinating what they conclude is
that actually these groups
do not live in small-scale societies at
all we're talking here about groups like
the matu in australian western desert or
tanzanian hadza actually what they find
is that
people living in these societies
maintain close relations or potential
relations way beyond their immediate
circle of family often even beyond their
language group
so we're talking about people who
potentially you could marry
people he would be obliged to offer
hospitality to if they came along from
one day from far away
this may not happen in practice but the
key point in evolutionary terms
is that members of these ostensibly very
small societies
are also holding in their minds
an image
of a vastly larger social network and
the archaeology really bears this out
because actually what you find before
cities in the archaeological record
are not these isolated pockets of human
beings but these grand sort of
coalitions of societies that often span
whole continents and they're held
together exactly by these norms of
ritual hospitality so when cities do
eventually begin to appear in various
parts of the world from around 5000
years ago
it almost looks more like a process of
contraction
than expansion it's like one of these
grand regional confederacies or
coalitions getting concentrated
in a single spot or a few spots
there's certainly no great sort of
psychological rupture that might
suddenly oblige people to give up all
their social freedoms and appoint great
leaders
and actually that's exactly what you
find when you look directly now at the
evidence and there's so much new
evidence just over the last 20 or 30
years for what the first cities in the
world on various different continents
were actually like this is what you find
it's not uniform some of them are
incredibly hierarchical
but a surprising number of others are
not actually it's yeah it is
amazing you know you're
you take us to these cities in
mesopotamia
in the ukraine in china and what you
show us is these egalitarian cities and
you're like wait wait wait what you know
how is that possible david egalitarian
cities well that's that's a great
example of how we work together you know
in this particular case it was david
just posing the question to me uh so are
there any galaxies you know anything
like an egalitarian city in um
in in the history you know in the
archaeological record and i started
telling him about these settlements
north of the black sea and what today is
ukraine and moldova um which are
astonishing they're um
they look like these great sort of
circles of tree rings of houses all
roughly the same size they're massive
they're five those start about five
thousand years ago so they're as old as
the first cities in mesopotamia they're
roughly the same size in terms of total
area there's lots of arguments as you
can imagine exactly how many thousands
of people lived in them but even
conservative estimates were talking
about probably tens of thousands of
people but there's simply no evidence
for
monarchy or public buildings or central
storage or administration or even just
market inequalities of wealth
so he said oh what that'll do and i said
yeah but nobody calls them cities
well why don't they call them cities i
said well because there's no
public buildings or monarchies or
central government i mean it's an
entirely logically circular thing that
you know one assumes the nature of the
city is to be hierarchical therefore
even if you get a settlement the size of
a city that isn't hierarchical you can't
call it a city so you know
it's a classic example of a bad
reasoning um so we just call them cities
basically and then these other examples
particularly from the americas but also
south asia
uh the early harappan civilization of
pakistan and the indus valley um is is
very interesting in this respect so yeah
i mean we won't have time to go into it
all now
but yeah we're ranging all over the
world you're bringing mind gendara at
that point too
um but let's move on to gender um um you
know gender you you make these
remarkable
revelations about gender too the bronze
age is supposed to bring about
patriarchy but you show us extraordinary
possibilities lots of things happening
neolithic matriarchy
don't make the case actually for
neolithic matriarch because it's funny
how this is very interesting because um
people often say there was an
archaeologist called um
maria gimbertas yes it's often claimed
makes the r made the argument
that neolithic societies were
matriarchal actually she never did she
was very careful to say that they
weren't actually matriarchal she she
basically just argued that in the
neolithic societies she knew best and
she was a really a world expert on the
balkan region and the prehis later
pre-history of the balkan region
that women had
[Music]
autonomy from men and a certain priority
in the ritual sphere um
and um
it's very interesting what happened to
her work and her reputation
largely after she passed away in the
1990s
i guess she was she was sort of vilified
for even raising the topic
of
you know
what was women's status in in the
household in the olympic times this is a
real problem uh for us because as as
you've inferred um
you know the question how did we get
stuck
the answer is not agriculture we won't
go into that now i expect but that's not
why we got stuck we spend a couple of
chapters explaining that's not the
reason
it's not cities
it's not as if these big seasonal
agglomerations suddenly got fixed into
cities and you know these are all silly
simple stories
but
we're interested in what
human beings actually got up to which
invariably is it's more complicated but
a lot more interesting but gender
relations um are actually pretty
fundamental to this question of how we
got stuck
in hierarchical patterns of authority
that we see today
i mean it can't be purely coincidental
that virtually all of the ancient
kingdoms and empires that of up until
modern times have taken the patriarchal
household as their basic political model
of governance so the king is the father
of his people
king rules the land much as he manages
his domestic estate
the question is how and when did that
happen
but partly because the whole issue of
gender in prehistory has become so
loaded almost taboo in some ways
it's very very difficult to get scholars
to engage in that conversation the fact
is if you actually look at the latest
research uh some of the best research
from the region that gimbaltas was
familiar with
comes from a site called chateau huyuk
in central turkey
actually what they found out is that men
and women
do seem to have enjoyed fairly equal
treatment in terms of things like diet
and health some of the art focuses on
female elders
women are very miserable visible in the
in the ritual sphere not to the
exclusion of men but not encompassed by
men either now that's not to say we're
dealing with a matriarchal society
but it doesn't look much like a
patriarchal society
either
and you know as you say as for the
question of whether women's freedom sort
of inevitably eroded with the rise of
cities and states yes clearly at times
that happened actually david wrote a lot
about it in his book on debt
but it certainly wasn't universal
the problem seems to be and this is
something we go into at various points
in the book is that the way history is
written seems almost designed
to make periods of women's freedom or
relative freedom invisible
like give you examples if you like
yeah yeah yeah no thanks david i mean
somewhere i mean so okay so what's
wonderful about the book is you know
you've
shown us that there's infinitely more
possibilities for how we've lived in the
world that people were you know
self-consciously thinking about their
social structures and making them and
creating them and and we were moving
between different forms and
but somewhere along the way right as you
say things did go wrong um we can't swap
in change anymore in in the same way
that we might have in the past perhaps
only the wealthy can alternative
alternate between
being you know living seasonally and
having different social structures
seasonally i mean
so what where did where have things gone
wrong what did go wrong um
uh yeah um let's maybe we can come to
some of some of those uh arguments well
this is a this is
this is not a simple argument but the
other major element uh i would say aside
from
gender uh is violence um and um i mean
first of all we just have to rule out
the sort of hobbsian premise that
prehistoric societies were
innately or perennially violent there's
actually very good statistical evidence
for things like violent death rates and
injury rates on paleolithic skeletons
and it just doesn't hold up
even in later periods yes you know you
get periods of intense intergroup
warfare but then you get long periods of
peace
so
you know the warfare competition it's no
more deeply rooted in evolutionary terms
then the opposite is deeply rooted and
no more less
now this raises the question of why it
is that in some cases
violence does have lasting durable
effects structural effects on societies
and why in other cases it doesn't so
much and what seemed really important to
us here another kind of pattern
that emerged out of our research
is that this has a lot to do with when
systems of violence get mixed up
with what you might call systems of care
i know that sounds a bit abstract but
just to give you one brief example
there's a whole series of
unrelated cases from shang china to uh
early dynastic egypt mesoamerica
where the appearance of monarchies for
the first time is associated with these
rituals you know the ones morris block
is slightly obsessed by where you have
extraordinary amounts of violence
literally hundreds of non-royal people
being killed and buried around a royal
tomb
it's all part of a big ritual
performance and the ultimate aim of the
performance is actually to care for
someone it's to care for the deceased
king to beautify him or her in death
make her into an ancestor and
interestingly these kind of mass
killings um nearly always seem to take
place at the point where monarchies come
into being and then they take her off
but somehow they seem crucial to that
initial rupture where ritual chiefs or
play kings as david like to call them
stop being play kings and they obtain
real sovereignty uh over there over the
living
and we have lots of other discussions
and examples in the book about how that
particular nexus between
violence and care
the loss of
basically social freedoms
which are otherwise um quite widespread
and taken for granted in many human
societies
yeah and and and i guess one of the
points you really draw out in the book
is this is nothing to do with like modes
of
the political economy nothing to do with
modes of production nothing to do with
livelihoods and so i guess one of the
obvious questions is you know what about
capitalism i mean you know just
have we
you know can we create all of these
different
social structures under under and you
know much more egalitarian models under
capitalism
what you mean by by capitalism you know
as you know better than i do david made
i think a very persuasive argument the
that we're not in capitalism at the
moment we're in something that he called
managerial feudalism
so we have to be clear what we're
arguing about
when we say capitalism
yeah sure well that's one we can take up
uh
later perhaps but let's move to freedoms
you know you you um because i think you
really make some really interesting um
in very very one of the things
you read the book and then you really
realize actually you know what you're
reading about what you're what you're
setting up is is another way for us a
project of freedom a kind of
a a a way for us to think about freedom
and why actually the central questions
we should be asking is what is are not
to do with inequality and equality but
to do with freedom and you re
make us rethink what this freedom is and
what freedom ought to be right and it'll
be really great to to hear hear
interesting because a lot of societies
that have been described as egalitarian
including kandirong's own society in the
eastern woodlands um
we're not egalitarian in the in that
material sense in fact they don't seem
to have cared that much about if
anyone's got more stuff than anyone else
what really seemed to matter
what really comes across in that indeed
going back to that indigenous critique
his freedoms personal freedoms personal
autonomy including women's freedoms
and
we really have to go back i think to
those points and and look at the
implications i mean
it really struck us that something
something strange has happened in the
sense that no
serious person in our fields of
archaeology and anthropology would be
caught today saying
i believe that you know all human
societies have evolved through these
stages from bands to tribes and
chieftains and states and whatever
but at the same time almost everyone
continues using the terms you know with
scare quotes and anyone outside those
disciplines still more or less assumes
that that is the
default story of human uh social
evolution and
we felt that one of the reasons for this
is simply because there is no other
conceptual framework which is as kind of
encompassing and as elegant frankly as
that one except that it's completely
wrong
so in the book we do try to lay some
foundations not in a dogmatic way you
know this is the beginning of a process
and actually this does take us back to
kandirok i mean you could imagine
kandirankan rousseau
may be agreeing on the virtues of
freedom and personal autonomy
but only kandironk would have actually
had any clue what it means in practice
to live in a society where most people
have not been trained into obedience the
way that we all have as david used to
joke you know the closest that
jean-jacques rousseau ever got to a
society of equals was probably someone
giving out equal slices of cake at a
dinner party
um so if we want to understand you know
back to your question what's been lost
what's gone wrong in societies today
then
it does seem instructive to look at
those basic freedoms the societies like
the when that but also many others seem
to have taken for granted
and we identified three
three elementary freedoms which we we
suggest were once common to much of
humanity
now in the next two minutes uh i could
attempt to tell you what they are
the first freedom is the the freedom to
move away
move away from one's social surroundings
escape on social surroundings knowing
that you will be welcomed and valued in
another place this is what underpins
those great coalitions those great
prehistoric coalitions of societies that
i was talking about
second freedom to disobey
arbitrary commands knowing that you will
not be ostracized but attended to listen
debated this is what underpinned the
kind of deliberative politics of native
american societies that so impressed
european thinkers at the time of the
enlightenment and the third freedom
is the freedom to create
entirely new and different
forms of society or move between
alternatives uh as with the seasonal
variations that i talked about but of
course not just that many many other
things as well
so
those are the basic uh basic freedoms we
have basic forms of domination too um i
don't think we're gonna have time to go
into them
no i think um
this hopeful note about freedom and and
and your redefinition of freedoms and i
know you're going on a long history of
of thinking about this but yes it's a is
a wonderful place for us to hand back to
chico
um to maybe take us and open up the q a
i'm sure people are really waiting to
ask questions and uh yeah so thank you
so much david it's been such a pleasure
thank you very much i hope i enjoyed it
yes well thank you both and indeed there
are a number of questions
already here um maybe we can come back
to the taxonomy of forms of domination
a little bit later
but let me i actually had some questions
of my own but uh but there are so many
great questions here that let me just uh
go launch straight
to them um
and uh is it all right with you uh uh
david if i group them into groups of two
as long as alpha promises to help me
answer them okay i won't do three but
i'll do two uh
and then maybe you can start and then
i'll comment as well before i started
the questions let me just um
let me just acknowledge here that andrea
mordons who is a social policy alumna
and also worked at occupy reminds us
that it's the 10th anniversary of the
occupy movement on friday the 15th
and applauds any recognition of david
graber
and his work since he was a
supporter now that was not a question
that was just something i wanted to
acknowledge let me let me start with
some some questions here there's one
from
gabriella who's a phd student at the
anthropology department here
she says could you comment more on the
historical emergence
of relations of domination in the most
intimate spaces and even in relations of
care it's hard to interpret something so
subtle from archaeological remains she
says but surely it's a direction to
explore more in dialogue with social
anthropology
so that's uh that's one and then the
next one in this batch is from rose
pravda who says rose just a worker of
the world do you talk about stories
discourses about the origins or meaning
of civilization
from those historical civilizational
cores or their neighbors do these
stories discourses have anything
interesting to say about the
relationship between humans and animals
okay so with those over to you david
thank you
i think um
yes uh
gabby's question
about relations of domination within the
household
um we felt that a particularly important
thinker in this respect was the
mid 20th century social anthropologist
franstein
who is a rather overlooked figure we
talk about him in the conclusion to the
book but he wrote an immense thesis
actually i have a print out of it up
here on my shelf
about what he called
pre-servile institutions
institutions
and he was exactly interested in this
question of how hierarchy takes root in
the household so this is not an
archaeological treaties in fact there's
very little archaeological evidence to
speak of when he wrote it
but the kind of questions he raised
and he himself was made a refugee from
central europe so he he knew what he was
talking about when he drew particular
attention to
effectively what happens when the first
of our freedoms the freedom
to move away and be welcomed somewhere
else when that breaks down
what happens when these norms of
hospitality and asylum
uh collapse
and how is that so often a stepping
stone towards forms of domination within
societies and he produced an
extraordinary range of examples from
different cultures different points of
history
to elaborate on that fact which which he
felt was fundamental um
but i completely agree with the
you know the nature of the question it's
exactly the kind of area that could shed
light on some things like the the roots
of patriarchy and really deserves a lot
more focused research
so we we do have a fair bit more on it
in the book but it's it's certainly one
of the points that we would have
developed a great deal
and hopefully other people will take
that
oh the other question well civilization
yeah one of my favorite topics i
actually one of the ways david and i
started working together is that he read
a very genuinely small book that i wrote
called what makes a civilization it's
about the ancient uh middle east egypt
and mesopotamia and the whole concept of
civilization and we do have a bit of an
aside on this in the dawn of everything
where we basically argue that there's
something fundamentally weird about our
concept of civilization which on the one
hand is supposed to mean being civil and
sort of being polite and being congenial
to each other
but when you look at the things that
people call civilizations in history
they're often exactly the opposite
they're you know brutal sort of slave
holding societies empires um you know
the ancient romans and china
monuments everywhere these are meant to
be civilization so there's something
strange and paradoxical about that
and actually other anthropologists like
marcel moss who was a great inspiration
to david and myself
tried to change the use of the term
civilization so that instead of
referring to these societies that are
held together by military means
effectively by coercion
we should talk instead about those great
coalitions those voluntary coalitions
that
hold people together over enormous areas
through things like hospitality and
feeding each other and caring for each
other why not call those civilizations
most argued in part which is also a
point about gender
because very often the um
the things that the people who are
responsible for all of that hospitality
uh are women um whereas the people
responsible for all the great stone
monuments uh proclaiming how great they
are historically have tended to be men
often appropriating the intellectual
achievements of of women so the whole
concept of civilization i would have
thought at this point it's probably not
going to go away you know it keeps
getting reinvented in myriad ways but i
think we we can probably do better than
we currently do
in defining it i'm sorry i haven't got
to the point about humans and animals um
but i could do unless you want to move
on to another question
or unless it's another question that
touches on
relationships to another another couple
of questions and then maybe either you
or alpha can go back to the humans and
animals
but here are two that i'm quite curious
about one from serdar burden from
glasgow
how does david see the current
decolonization of curriculum movement
some critics pointed out that this
movement is still eurocentric and lacks
local context too can this movement
broaden our perspective on history and
the concept of the west
that's one the other one which i quite
like is very short question any examples
from africa
examples of
i mean you spoke of many things from
many places but nothing seemed to have
been from africa i think is what's
motivating the question oh i see yeah um
yeah no that's true uh
we uh we focus in this book um on the
americas
um and particularly for those reasons
that i've emphasized um it became in
ways that we hadn't anticipated
a book with
a focus on that particular encounter
with indigenous peoples of the americas
and then reading that back uh into the
uh the archaeological evidence from
other parts of the world including
africa
so we have extensive sections on ancient
egypt for example
but i'm aware
um actually that's where most of my
field work and research is and david was
also an africanist he was a specialist
in the anthropology of madagascar
there are innumerable other examples
from the sub-saharan region
where one could explore all of these
concepts and what we'd hoped to do
is exactly that
write more books write a number of
sequels at least three
and
a deuce more examples
um
decolonization is something that i i see
up close it's happening on my own campus
at
my own
institute
and
i i see it as something um
basic and fundamental um
particularly to the disciplines that
david and i belong to archaeology and
anthropology are completely rooted in
the history of colonialism and colonial
thought as i think will be very apparent
from all of the material that i've
discussed you know the idea that
indigenous peoples who are still with us
have nothing much to tell us except
about some you know remote epoch in
human prehistory is itself a direct
outcome
of colonial mindsets and colonialism
the idea that they're systems of
property actually this brings us back to
human animal relations the idea that
their systems of property and land
management have nothing to teach us
um is itself also a direct product of
the thinking of people like john locke
you know back in the 17th century the
agricultural argument that if you don't
cultivate wheat and mix your hands in
the soil the same way that we do somehow
you have no
curatorship of that territory
whereas in fact
there's probably an enormous amount that
we could learn
from other ways of owning and caring for
land and resources
one example that we go into in the book
which touches exactly on this issue of
human relations to the non-human world
are societies that have sometimes been
described as totemic in the
anthropological literature particularly
in north america
and also australia
where
a group owns its totem but the
implication of that is precisely
different from our notion of ownership
and our notion of what it means to have
full ownership which is very much rooted
in the roman tradition and roman law
something that orlando paterson the
jamaican sociologist
wrote extensively about where full
ownership in the european legal sense is
the right of abuse i think is the latin
term which is exactly what it sounds
like abuse it's the right to commoditize
buy sell turn and turn someone or
something into property
i mean these are traditions rooted in
slave law as paterson argues
whereas in these totemic systems
ownership has exactly the opposite
connotation
a clan owns its totem which is usually
an animal species and what that means is
precisely that they can't hunt it and
eat it and kill it they have to nurture
it they have to create
an environment in which it can thrive
and reproduce so concepts of ownership
that are actually based on
caretaking
as opposed to extraction uh have worked
as we can see now archaeologically
as well
not just in primitive small-scale
societies but actually on really
impressive
scales at large demographic scales prior
to the colonial era its colonialism and
the the effects of genocide pandemics
epidemics
that really warps our picture of what
these societies were actually like
but we can now begin to correct that
picture so decolonizing the curriculum
um is is simply a matter of good science
you know it's it's a matter of getting
the facts right
one of the interesting things sorry to
can i
can you hear me i'm just interjecting
here one of the interesting things that
we've talked about david about
decolonization and this book is
how you know so many of the arguments
you're making right
are about
let's look at what indigenous societies
were actually like let's look at what
indigenous scholars are saying look
that's you know you you
instead of rousseau and hobbes you you
know you you you you make us focus on
kanji rank and what he has to say and
throughout the book there are these
people who have been marginalized in
various ways maria gimba gimbaptus
french steiner you know you're drawing
our attention to these people who had
some really interesting things to say
about human history um and who've been
forgotten or sidelined and you're
centering them
but one of the things that we've talked
about david which is so in
you know is is
it is so um
fascinating in relation to this question
of decolonization is it it takes two
white men to write a book like this you
know to make those voices heard um so
there's some kind of ironies in how this
whole thing you know decolonizing
curriculum
works
yeah i mean it's something we talk about
in um near the beginning of the book
you know the prevailing view that
western philosophy couldn't possibly
have been influenced to that extent
by indigenous intellectuals
and therefore that um it's strange it's
almost like a kind of inverse racism you
know this idea that europeans must have
made it all up
anything and everything that's
attributed to an indigenous thinker or
an indigenous intellectual must be a
fabrication or a fantasy because how how
could people who are engaged in genocide
possibly have been listening
to people they were effectively wiping
out or colluding and wiping them out
um and but the effect is almost a sort
of arrogant assumption
that
european or western
systems of thought are somehow so
impervious to outside influences
you see what i mean
so it ends up although you know these
are well-intentioned points
um
against the romanticization
of non-european peoples
turning people into noble savages or
whatever it may be they end up almost
doing the reverse
and creating this illusion of
european
philosophy european sciences this kind
of hermetically sealed thing
so really what we're dealing with in the
book
is the um
the business as we see it as you say
being who we are
of trying to undo
some of the conceptual damage
uh that's been done
by
writing out those debts
uh that what we regard as western
civilization owes
to other people and other traditions
um that's that's where we've focused our
work uh drawing on a whole range of
scholars uh some of indigenous descent
some not
much through dialogue as well there's a
question about dialogue but yes yeah
yes let's get to some of those other
questions so here's one
got a lot of likes um it is
although the context is of course
overtly authoritarian would you consider
that the world slipping into lockdowns
post cover to be a modern instance of
dramatically changing or shifting entire
social structures
in the sense that even if authoritaria
if even authoritarians can enact such
changes today doing so in more
democratic ways is not actually that
unrealistic in the face
that's a coveted and
modern examples of your seasonal changes
in social structure
the second one uh is from that's from
the ash lab the one i just read the one
from george turner here
there's a slight paradox
or bitter sweetness
in coming to understand the scope of
human possibilities
whilst deconstructing the myths that
impossibility can be empowering and
hopeful can also leave us feeling
disappointed that we have not and may
never come to realize these
possibilities
myths he says can be profoundly
comforting in allowing us to dismiss our
lack of freedom
as inevitable and because it absolves us
of responsibility
so with these meets myths destroyed how
do we cultivate and nurture collective
comfort despite our pointless
unnecessary and wasteful unfreedom so it
sounds like your book will will throw
people into
depression and despair by destroying
those myths so how do you avoid that by
cultivating and nurturing yeah
we've we've already had a bit of that
you know we wrote essays and also
scholarly uh
papers for scholarly journals um
over the years that we were preparing
the books we already sort of had a
flavor of this of
actually it's usually other academics
it's not
other readers of our work who seem quite
uplifted by what we're saying quite
often but a lot of academics seem to get
depressed so we've taken away our myth
you know you've taken away our nice
simple story
and it's it's it's annoying and and you
haven't given us another one but you
know that that's the whole point uh
we're not in the business of making up
fairy tales we're archaeologists and
anthropologists trying to understand um
this you know very complex and hard to
interpret uh record of scientific
evidence
um it is you know the fact that you can
summarize what you might call the uh the
old story of the origins of inequality
in about two sentences
um is about as clear an indication as
you could hope for that we are in the
realm of myth
the realm of fables and fairy tales no
sensible accounts of the broad sweep of
human history is going to fit into a
tweet
but the old one does so that's a bit of
a giveaway so i think i think um
you know there's there's a debate to be
had there about um
the place of myth i don't think myth
itself is the problem all societies have
them just as all societies have their
own versions of science
um but the kind of myths that we've been
relying on for two and a half centuries
now i think are first of all terribly
boring
you know seeing them again and again and
again
and particularly at this
time
when uh i think any sane person can see
that as a species we face some very
serious challenges
and those are challenges precisely about
what we call the third freedom you know
can we actually remake our societies in
some structurally significantly
different form that could potentially
make a difference to something like the
earth system
or rates of global poverty
um
[Music]
sorry how did i get on to this oh yeah
um well if you keep telling yourself a
myth a fable a story about human history
that basically drums into your head that
the forces of history and evolution are
against you
but everything we have now is somehow
pre-ordained or inevitable the kind of
teleology
teleological
logic of the rational skeptic that alpha
was talking about right at the the
beginning of our chat
is not helpful
and it's also not true
so i think it is time probably to
abandon some of these very shock-worn
myths
stop this kind of hobbs resort back and
forth
and actually look again at the evidence
which is there
david let me that's great let me
interrupt you there before we get back
to the covet question just because this
is the perfect sort of segue into the
question that i had wanted to ask you um
which is that in the beginning of the
book you
you know you you
sort of uh very effectively
uh destroy the two the dichotomy of of
you know hobbes and rousseau and the
noble soviet savage and the nasty and
british and short
um but then one of the arguments against
them is you say they have dire political
implications um and so
now when you're answering this question
you say
we've taken away our myths and you
haven't given us another one
and yet is it true that you haven't
given us another one because it seems
very clear that you did want to have a
political implication with your
book um that wasn't dire
and so that's part a of the question
what is the political implication that
isn't dire
and the second one
is if it is
the possibility that we can create these
new
forms of society because there is no
preordained predetermined trajectory
from either the fall from rousseau or
the rise from hobbes
then on the other hand you know you lay
out quite clearly they say well these
are sciences weren't good
or bad they were human much like human
there's a little bit of everything
there's going to be some selfishness
some
[Music]
love of equity some preference for
equity uh some order some chaos
but if that's the case
then by what you know a simple-minded
economist like mew would call the law of
large numbers that is we've been trying
this
for millennia right
what is there
to suggest that we would be able to
overcome the bad parts uh you know what
is there to suggest perhaps it's climate
change perhaps it's being faced by the
demise of the world but you know what is
there to suggest that we can actually
bring ourselves together in a way that
we have never done before
to create to create a utopia
well first of all i don't personally
think utopia is the point
um
the point is precisely that we're not
talking about utopias
if you start with a myth and a
completely fantastic notion of you know
where human societies originate and how
they develop then all you can produce is
uteps because they're sort of built on
sand they're built on nothing
there's a reason the book is 700 pages
long and copiously referenced it's
because we don't want to do that we're
serious about this stuff
and
i'm just trying to understand your
question properly chico when you say
we've been trying this for millennia
what is it you think we've been trying
to
order our social lives
yes
ah all right um i mean
i think for me this would have to come
back to the the question about
decolonization because
at least for the last few hundred years
i think um
there's been a very
obvious
you know enormously well documented
effort on the part of
some states and societies to do the
opposite to create disorder
and to
conquer and own and i mean the whole
history of the last few centuries i
think
is quite difficult to interpret as an
attempt to order society
it seems to have been about something
else but don't wouldn't you say yes i
really don't want to because now i've
abused my prerogative as chair but just
give me one moment to sort of
push you a little a little bit on this i
mean you might say that you know the
british were definitely trying to
disorganize and create chaos and all
their colonies as were the french and
many others but perhaps they were trying
to organize things at home at least and
create
something now may have been a mess may
have been a monarchy there were
parliaments there was all sorts of
things
whether this is fully western and
entirely western i'm not sure i mean you
guys would know much better than me but
it would seem to me that the chinese
empires from many centuries ago probably
did the same
or the the mongolian empires of the
genghis khan and others they probably
try to organize their own
existences in some way which might have
been terrible or not um and they uh
didn't
really give a damn about anybody else
and created chaos everywhere else i mean
the notion of order you know the aztecs
are reported to have done this to other
peoples uh in the mexican peninsula um
and and uh and and i suspect you know
there you know the malian empire of old
uh may have well done that to their
neighbors so to me it just goes back and
i don't know that i fully
believe what i'm about to say but just
for the sake of argument here there's
something about human nature
uh
[Music]
that means we
oscillate between this good and bad it's
almost like your seasonality that alpo
was mentioning um
and and so
so
yeah just
is there something
that's not a myth
that can tell us
we can do it really differently
well the point of the book really is
that um the the evidence of human
history tells us precisely that
i mean the kind of order that you seem
to be talking about there is is really
order through violence if i understand
you correctly
um and you know this this comes back to
a question that is often put to me
well you know if you're right um and
there's nothing inevitable about the
trajectory that we we find ourselves on
these days
how is it that the world is covered from
end to end with uh with
nation states you know
in some way coercive
and have these kind of extraordinary uh
powers you know surely this must be
somehow the result of thousands of years
of human social evolution
now
if you're a scientist or a historian um
you're supposed to go for the simplest
explanation you know what scientists
call them the most parsimonious one
and the most parsimonious one that
requires the fewest logical leaps is
that the reason that much of the earth
many of the countries and regions that
you referred to covered with nation
states that look a bit like european
ones is because europeans put them there
largely at the point of a gun
that's a pretty compelling explanation
it's a hell of a lot more complicated
and difficult to try and explain it
as the outcome of thousands of years of
cultural evolution going back to the
agricultural revolution and the origin
of cities you get into all sorts of
logical and factual difficulties which
we try to unpick in the book
um and that in itself i think uh um
gives a different perspective on where
we find ourselves
if that's at all helpful as an answer
yeah but the aztecs they couldn't have
been put there by the europeans but then
did i suggest they were
well i just said the logical leap the
the the explanation that required the
least logical leaps is that the
europeans put them there which i can see
in many many cases but i don't i don't
follow the logic the aztec triple
alliance was was there before europeans
there's no question about that
yeah
great well we could continue but mayhem
we'll have to do that in the pub let me
see if there's any any uh one more
chance for a question here
um
yeah let's get to the one that that
that that alpha had also noted so so
scott thompson asks
david i guess he means
graber here always stress the importance
of dialogue great ideas emerge
dialogically from the relations between
people as this book emerged from a
prolonged conversation between the two
davids how important is dialogue to the
structure of the book and to a new
history of mankind
thank you it's a really interesting
question
um
that's right
david liked this idea um that um
i think is is now quite sort of soundly
demonstrated in in neuroscience that if
you try and hold an idea in your head
you know your window of concentration is
absolutely my minute but when you talk
to somebody about it our capacity to
actually focus on a concept unless
you're you know some sort of highly
trained individual like a guru or a yogi
or something who can hold a thought for
so long all by themselves his particular
skill
but there's a reason he pointed out
where so much ancient philosophy not
just in the european tradition but in
others is presented in the form of
dialogues
and i think you know certainly the
greatest privilege of my academic
career to have this incredibly
protracted uh dialogue with david greber
who was somebody who would have
dialogues with absolutely anybody and
treated everybody exactly the same and
i'm sure that was one of the you know
the sources of the richness of his own
thinking and uh i think it is we do try
in the book to reconstruct i mean the
way the book structured which is
slightly unorthodox kind of reflects the
evolution
of that conversation
over a very long time span and of course
the whole idea of dialogue in the sense
of kandiya or
and how things emerge from that is
terribly important as well it's not
something i thought much about before
but it probably is quite quite a central
theme
that's great um we're almost at the end
of the time unfortunately there are lots
more questions about 26 open at the
moment uh which shows you know we had uh
400 people at at the peak here um a lot
of interest in this great book just
before we end i wonder if alpo you'd
like to
sort of say a few words
no i i just want to say thanks so much
um
david
uh
for yeah for for kicking off you know
setting the float the book into the
world and
it's going to have many lives and
afterlives and chico thank you so much
uh for sharing the event and
i think yeah there's so much to your
questions that we can take forward uh
in further discussion um yeah and it's
just been such a privilege and a
pleasure to be a part of this event
thank you so much thank you very much uh
alpha in particular and chica for the
chance to do this really appreciate it
yeah i know and let me just in
conclusion thank um everyone who
attended but particularly our speakers
um professor al-basha and professor
david wengrow in particular one of the
two authors of the book it is a
fascinating book i haven't been able to
read all of it yet but the beginning is
absolutely fascinating and i will finish
the book it's an incredibly erudite and
well-written and compelling piece of
work so i urge all of you to buy it and
with that thank you very much indeed to
all of you and see you at our next event
thank you